User Guide: Processing Biofilm Data into CSV

This script reads structured .txt files containing data entries with an 'Image Name'
property and compiles them into a single, filtered .csv file. It also includes special
handling to summarize “Live” and “Dead” biomass values and their ratio.

Requirements

Before using the script, you must have Python installed on your Windows machine.

How to check if Python is installed:

Open Command Prompt or PowerShell.

Type:
python --version
OR
py --version

If Python is installed, you’ll see a version number like:
Python 3.10.6

If you see an error like:
'python' is not recognized as an internal or external command

Then you need to install Python from:
https://www.python.org/downloads/windows/

IMPORTANT: During installation, check the box labeled
"Add Python to PATH".

Preparing Your Files

The script can be run from any location on your computer.
Just make sure the path you provide to the root directory of your files
is correct.

Only files inside the specified root directory and its subfolders
will be scanned.

Files that do not contain the property 'Image Name' will be ignored.

Running the Script

Open Command Prompt or PowerShell.

Navigate to the folder where your script is saved.

Run this command:

python script.py "C:\Path\To\Your\Data" --output results.csv

Parameters:

First (required): The root directory where the script will scan
for .txt files.

--output (optional): The name of the output .csv file.
If not provided, it defaults to "output.csv".

What the Script Does

Scans all .txt files under the specified root directory.

Includes only those files that contain 'Image Name'.

Extracts the following fields from each file:

Biomass (µm^3/µm^2)

Roughness Coefficient (Ra*)

Surface Area (µm^2)

Surface to biovolume ratio (µm^2/µm^3)

Average thickness (Entire area) (µm)

Average thickness (Biomass) (µm)

Special Handling:

For any Image Name ending in 'null ch1':

Finds related entries ending in '#1 ch1' (Live) and '#1 ch2' (Dead).

Extracts their 'Biomass' values into new columns: 'Live' and 'Dead'.

Adds a 'DEAD/LIVE ratio' column (Dead divided by Live).

Notes

Output CSV will be created in the same folder from which you run the script.

Blank values will be empty in the output.

Script is intended to work on any platform but has only been tested on Windows.

Ensure text files are UTF-8 encoded (do not use Word or rich text format).

End of Guide

